Jan 5
---------
At the international event Advantage Assam, Mr. Modi said “Connectivity is key to developing the region, the reason why the government has adopted the motto of ‘transformation by transportation’ to change the face of the northeast.”

Turkey’s “Olive Branch” operation was launched on 20 January to drive the Kurdish YPG militia out of Afrin (Syria).

In what’s being hailed as a “major breakthrough” in Maya archaeology, researchers have identified the ruins of more than 60,000 houses, palaces, elevated highways, and other human-made features that have been hidden for centuries under the jungles of northern Guatemala.
Using a revolutionary technology known as LiDAR (short for “Light Detection And Ranging”), scholars digitally removed the tree canopy from aerial images of the now-unpopulated landscape, revealing the ruins of a sprawling pre-Columbian civilization that was far more complex and interconnected than most Maya specialists had supposed.

Remote sensors collect data by detecting the energy that is reflected from Earth. These sensors can be on satellites or mounted on aircraft (or on ships in the case of Sonar).
Lidar bounces a laser pulse (NOT radio wave) off a target and then measures the time (and distance) each pulse traveled. Those measurements reveal the relative heights of features on the ground struck by the laser pulses. These pulses can penetrate forest cover to record the shape of the ground below. That makes this technology especially valuable for mapping.
	A LIDAR instrument principally consists of a laser, a scanner, and a specialized GPS receiver. Airplanes and helicopters are the most commonly used platforms for acquiring LIDAR data over broad areas. Two types of LIDAR are topographic and bathymetric. Topographic LIDAR typically uses a near-infrared laser to map the land, while bathymetric lidar uses water-penetrating green light to also measure seafloor and riverbed elevations.
.         Radar: ra(dio) d(etection) a(nd) r(anging)

·         Sonar: so(und) na(vigation) (and) r(anging)

·         Lidar: li(ght) d(etection) a(nd) r(anging)
	Radar, sonar and lidar also can reveal information about an object’s shape, size, material and direction. Air traffic controllers use radar to spot aircraft in the sky. Police use it to detect speeders. Navies use sonar to map the ocean bottom — or to look for enemy submarines. And lidar helps read the lay of the land or features on Earth’s surface. Lidar’s laser pulses can penetrate forest cover to record the shape of the ground below. That makes this technology especially valuable for mapping.


Udayagiri has 20 caves built during the Gupta period (300-550 CE).
This site has iconography related to Vaishnavism, Shaivism and Shaktism (Durga), as well as important inscriptions from the Gupta period. Of all the caves, cave number 5 is the most famous with its colossal and iconic Varaha sculpture which represents the story of the rescue of Bhudevi (Earth).


South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC):: all the 8 neighboring countries
    Pakistan, Afghanistan.
    Bangladesh, Bhutan
    India
    Maldives.
    Nepal.
    Sri Lanka.


The Sun Temple located at Modhera (Gujarat) was built in 1026-27 AD.
Arasavalli Sun Temple is a 7th-century AD Sun Temple at Arasavalli in Andhra Pradesh.
Omkareshwar is a temple dedicated to God Shiva.





Isotope: same number of proton in each atom; differs in #f neutrons
Isotone: same number of neutron in each atom; differs in #f protons






Prachi Valley civilisation has contributed a lot towards amalgamation, assimilation and proliferation of different religious faiths and cults.
assimilation: the process of taking in and fully understanding information or ideas.
Proliferation: rapid increase in the number or amount of something.
Deliberation: long and careful consideration or discussion. 
Dilution:  Section 6A violates the Articles of the Constitution by diluting the political rights of residents of Assam
Accord: give or grant someone (power, status, or recognition).
impediments: a hindrance or obstruction in doing something.
Doctrine: a belief or set of beliefs held and taught by a Church, political party, or other group.
reciprocity: the practice of exchanging things with others for mutual benefit, especially privileges granted by one country or organization to another.
dissemination: the act of spreading something, especially information, widely; circulation
	this seminar me ye bologe to ye disseminate ho jayegi
proactive: (of a person or action) creating or controlling a situation rather than just responding to it after it has happened.
aggravate: make (a problem, injury, or offence) worse or more serious.... grave is there means problem
envisioned: imagine as a future possibility; visualize. ex: The  National  Health  Policy,  2017  has  envisioned  Health  and Wellness  Centres  as  the  foundation  of  India’s  health  system.
Status quo is a Latin phrase meaning the existing state of affairs, particularly with regard to social or political issues
multilateral: agreed upon or participated in by three or more parties, especially the governments of different countries. ex- The Minamata Convention on Mercury is a multilateral environmental agreement that addresses specific human activities which are contributing to widespread mercury pollution.
pulmonary: relating to lungs
interim: the intervening time
Loggerhead: Engaged in a head-on dispute: “Labor and management are at loggerheads in this affair, and it may be some time before they can negotiate a settlement.” 
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have been at loggerhead for their ‘due share’ of Cauvery river.
Pertinent - relevant or applicable to a particular matter; apposite.
addressing issues pertinent to the future of humanity.

6/3
demographers: those who study about the population
Speculate: form a theory or conjecture about a subject without firm evidence.
demographers speculate that this may be nature’s way of offsetting the higher risk that men have of dying
proliferation: rapid increase in the number or amount of something
Mark Promoting the development of advanced, more proliferation resistant nuclear power reactors.
congregation: a group of people assembled for religious worship.
The Attukal Pongala festival is the largest congregation of women for a festival in the world.
erstwhile - former. "the erstwhile president of the company"
rechristen -     give a new name to.    "the brewery rechristened the pub The Brown Trout"
Livestock - Livestock are domesticated animals raised in an agricultural setting to produce labor and commodities such as meat, eggs, milk, fur, leather, and wool. 

expedite -- make (an action or process) happen sooner or be accomplished more quickly.  "he promised to expedite economic reforms"
ex post facto--     with retrospective action or force.     "ex post facto laws"

influx - an arrival or entry of large numbers of people or things.  ex - Assam, which faced influx from Bangladesh since the early 20th century
contentious - involving heated argument. ex - it become a contentious issue in the State’s politics.


flee: runaway   -  Outbreaks of violence in Rakhine State, Myanmar, have forced hundreds of thousands of Rohingya people to flee their homes.
