Chief minister Nitish Kumar has come out in support of holding simultaneous elections to the Lok Sabha and state assemblies. He said, “Holding simultaneous elections is, in principle, a very good proposal. It will not only reduce the period of election atmosphere, but also provide maximum time to the elected governments for work.”

 

Support from NITI Aayog:

The Niti Aayog has also favoured conducting synchronised two-phase Lok Sabha and assembly elections from 2024 in “national interest”. All elections in India should happen in a free, fair and synchronised manner to ensure minimum “campaign mode” disruption to governance, the government think tank had said in its report released recently.

NITI Aayog has proposed the following in this regard:

    To implement this in the national interest, a focused group of stakeholders comprising constitutional and subject matter experts, think tanks, government officials and representatives of various political parties should be formed to work out appropriate implementation related details.
    This may include drafting appropriate Constitution and statutory amendments, agreeing on a workable framework to facilitate transition to simultaneous elections, developing a stakeholder communication plan and various operational details.
    It has made the Election Commission the nodal agency to look into the suggestion and set a “timeline” of March 2018 for this purpose.

Simultaneous elections: Is it a good idea?

    This will help save public money.
    It will be a big relief for political parties that are always in campaign mode.
    It will allow political parties to focus more on policy and governance.

 

Need for simultaneous elections:

Unnecessary expenditures: Elections are held all the time and continuous polls lead to a lot of expenditure. More than Rs1,100 crore was spent on the 2009 Lok Sabha polls and the expenditure had shot up to Rs4,000 crore in 2014.

Use of manpower: Also, over a crore government employees, including a large number of teachers, are involved in the electoral process. Thus, the continuous exercise causes maximum harm to the education sector.

Security concerns: Security forces also have to be diverted for the electoral work even as the country’s enemy keeps plotting against the nation and terrorism remains a strong threat.


Way ahead:
The time is ripe for a constructive debate on electoral reforms and a return to the practice of the early decades after Independence when elections to the Lok Sabha and state assemblies were held simultaneously. It is for the Election Commission to take this exercise forward in consultation with political parties.

-------------------------------------------------
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has relaxed the guidelines for Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs) in order to broaden the scope of fund raising by such instruments.

    It has been decided to allow REITs and InvITs to raise capital by issuing debt securities. REITs have also been allowed to lend to an underlying holding company or a special purpose vehicle (SPV).

 

What are REITs?

REITs are similar to mutual funds. While mutual funds provide for an opportunity to invest in equity stocks, REITs allow one to invest in income-generating real estate assets.

 

How does an REIT work?

REITs raise funds from a large number of investors and directly invest that sum in income-generating real estate properties (which could be offices, residential apartments, shopping centres, hotels and warehouses). The trusts are listed in stock exchanges so that investors can buy units in the trust. REITs are structured as trusts. Thus, the assets of an REIT are held by an independent trustee on behalf of unit holders.

 

Tax and other issues:

Short-term capital gain tax is applicable for unit holders at the rate of 15%. While interest is tax-exempt for REITs, it is taxable for unit holders. The registration charges for every purchase and sale of property is still applicable.

---------------------------
The law ministry has given its concurrence to the draft Fugitive Economic Offenders bill that will give powers to the government to confiscate property of economic offenders and defaulters who flee India, albeit with a new provision.

Saving clause is the new provision that the Law Ministry wants to be incorporated in the Fugitive Economic Offenders Bill, 2017. A saving clause provides for certain exception(s) in a statute. It enables the repealed law to be in force with respect to some existing rights.

 

Highlights of the Bill:

The bill flows from Finance Minister Arun Jaitleys 2017 -18 Budget speech promising legislative changes or even a new law to confiscate the assets of such fugitives.

    It seeks to deter economic offenders from evading the process of Indian law by fleeing the country.
    The proposed law will be applicable in cases where the value of offences is over Rs 100 crore.
    The bill proposes to allow the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), the premier technical snoop wing under the finance ministry, to file an application for the declaration of fugitive economic offender for confiscation of their assets.
    The courts under PMLA would be entrusted with the responsibility to try the case.
    Also, the bill has provision for appointment of an administrator to dispose off the property to pay off the creditors. Besides, the provisions of the proposed law will override provisions of other existing laws.
    Also, the burden of proof for establishing that an individual is a fugitive economic offender will be on the authorities.

 

Need for a law in this regard:

There have been several instances of economic offenders fleeing the jurisdiction of Indian courts, anticipating the commencement, or during the pendency, of criminal proceedings. The absence of such offenders from Indian courts has several deleterious consequences— first, it hampers investigation in criminal cases; second, it wastes precious time of courts of law; third, it undermines the rule of law in India.

 

Who is a fugitive economic offender?

A Fugitive Economic Offender is a person who has an arrest warrant issued in respect of a scheduled offence and who leaves or has left India so as to avoid criminal prosecution, or refuses to return to India to face criminal prosecution.

-----------------------------

